Symbolic Meets Structural: A Bakeoff Evaluation of HNSW Vector Database Integration in PrologAI

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University), Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova, ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

June 24, 2026


ABSTRACT

PrologAI is a symbolic cognitive substrate written in SWI-Prolog (Sociaal-Wetenschappelijke Informatica Prolog).

Its Lattice (the persistent knowledge graph at the core of PrologAI) relies on a pluggable vector similarity layer called the vector_backend pack (PR 2).

This paper reports the first live bakeoff comparing two vector backends: (1) the built-in pure-Prolog fallback and (2) the RuVector HTTP REST (Representational State Transfer) backend, which connects PrologAI to the RuVector vector database via its HTTP Application Programming Interface (API).

RuVector uses the HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World) algorithm for approximate nearest-neighbor search, with SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) acceleration via the hnsw_rs 0.3.3 crate.

Three bakeoff runs were conducted at increasing vector-collection sizes: [100, 1000], [1000, 5000, 10,000], and [100,000].

RuVector won all three runs with scores of 0.2692, 0.2648, and 0.2655, respectively.

The pure-Prolog backend scored 0.0628, 0.0660, and 0.0650 in the corresponding runs.

The RuVector advantage is approximately 4.1 times across all scales tested.

Crucially, RuVector's score varied by less than 2 percent across three orders of magnitude of collection size, from 100 to 100,000 vectors.

This flat score profile confirms the sub-linear scaling property predicted by HNSW theory and demonstrates that RuVector is a production-viable vector backend for PrologAI at scales beyond what pure-Prolog in-memory storage can sustain.


1. INTRODUCTION

Vector similarity search is a core operation in cognitive AI systems.

When a PrologAI mind reasons about a new percept, it must retrieve the most semantically similar prior experiences from its Lattice.

This retrieval is a k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) query, where k is the number of similar items returned, against a collection of high-dimensional floating-point vectors.

The performance of this retrieval step directly constrains the speed of the entire cognitive cycle.

PrologAI's vector_backend pack provides a backend-agnostic six-predicate contract that any vector store can implement without touching the reasoning layer above it.

The six predicates are:

• vb_create/4 - create a named index of declared dimension

• vb_insert/4 - store a vector with its node identifier and metadata

• vb_search/4 - return the K nearest neighbors of a query vector

• vb_delete/2 - remove a vector by identifier

• vb_update_weights/3 - adjust a vector's learned edge weight

• vb_close/1 - flush and release an index

At the time of the bakeoff reported here, two backends are registered: the pure-Prolog fallback (the default, for development and CI) and the RuVector HTTP REST backend (introduced in PR 2, update, merged 2026-06-24).

The purpose of this paper is to quantify the performance difference between these two backends across a range of collection sizes, and to characterize how RuVector's HNSW index scales as the number of stored vectors grows.


2. BACKGROUND

2.1 Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search

Exact k-NN search in D-dimensional space requires comparing the query vector against every stored vector, giving O(N x D) time complexity, where N is the collection size and D is the dimension.

For large N (tens of thousands or millions of vectors), exact search becomes the performance bottleneck.

Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithms trade a small, bounded loss in recall for a large gain in speed.

The HNSW algorithm (Malkov and Yashunin, 2020) is the dominant ANN algorithm in production vector database systems.

It builds a hierarchical graph of proximity links during insert time.

At search time, it traverses this graph using a greedy best-first strategy, exploring only the fraction of the graph that lies near the query vector.

The expected search time is O(log N), compared to O(N) for exact search.

The algorithm's efConstruction and efSearch parameters control the quality-speed trade-off: larger values produce higher recall at the cost of slower insert and search.

2.2 SIMD Acceleration

SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) is a processor feature that applies one arithmetic instruction to multiple data elements in parallel within a single CPU cycle.

For vector distance computations (such as cosine similarity or Euclidean distance), SIMD allows a processor to compute distances across 4, 8, or 16 floating-point values simultaneously, rather than one at a time.

On modern x86_64 processors, SIMD extensions such as SSE4 (Streaming SIMD Extensions 4), AVX (Advanced Vector Extensions), and AVX-512 provide 128-bit, 256-bit, and 512-bit vector registers respectively.

The hnsw_rs crate used by RuVector applies SIMD acceleration through the anndists distance library, which selects the widest available SIMD instruction set at compile time.

2.3 PrologAI and the Lattice

PrologAI is a symbolic cognitive substrate implementing the six-stage SPARC (Specification, Pseudocode, Architecture, Refinement, Completion, Demonstration Plan) development methodology.

The Lattice is PrologAI's persistent node-fact knowledge graph.

Each node in the Lattice represents a concept, percept, or reasoning artifact.

The vector_backend pack provides the similarity retrieval layer that allows the Lattice to find semantically related nodes by their vector representations, without any neural network, large language model (LLM), or statistical pretraining.

2.4 RuVector

RuVector (https://github.com/ruvnet/ruvector) is an open-source vector database written in Rust.

It exposes an HTTP REST API served by the Axum 0.7 web framework running on the Tokio async runtime.

Its core indexing engine is the hnsw_rs 0.3.3 crate (a patched version with rand 0.8 compatibility), which implements the HNSW algorithm with SIMD-accelerated distance computations via anndists.

The server accepts JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) request bodies and returns JSON response bodies.

The three endpoints used by the PrologAI backend are:

• POST /collections - create a named vector collection

• PUT /collections/{name}/points - upsert (insert or update) a batch of vectors

• POST /collections/{name}/points/search - search for K nearest neighbors

• DELETE /collections/{name} - drop a collection and release server memory


3. METHODS

3.1 Bakeoff Harness

The bakeoff is implemented in packs/vector_backend/prolog/bakeoff.pl as the predicate run_bakeoff/2, which takes a list of backend atoms and a list of collection sizes.

For each backend and each size, the harness measures:

• Insert time (InsT) in milliseconds: the wall-clock time to insert N vectors into a fresh collection, where each vector is a 64-dimensional hash projection of the term term(I) for I in 1 to N.

• Search latency P50 in milliseconds: the 50th percentile (median) wall-clock time across 100 search queries. The 50th percentile is the value below which 50 percent of observed latencies fall. It represents the typical case.

• Search latency P99 in milliseconds: the 99th percentile wall-clock time across 100 search queries. The 99th percentile is the value below which 99 percent of observed latencies fall. It represents the worst-case tail latency that almost all users will experience.

Each search query uses a 64-dimensional hash projection of the term query(Q) for Q in 1 to 100, requesting the 20 nearest neighbors (k = 20).

3.2 Scoring Function

The aggregate score for a backend across all measurement sizes is computed as the arithmetic mean of per-measurement contributions.

For each measurement at size S, the contribution is:

Contribution = (ContIns + ContP50 + ContP99) / 3

where:

ContIns  = 1 / (InsT + 1.0)

ContP50  = 1 / (P50 + 0.001)

ContP99  = 1 / (P99 + 0.001)

This scoring function is an inverted-latency metric.

Lower insert time and lower search latency produce higher contributions, and therefore a higher final score.

The small additive constants (1.0 for insert time and 0.001 for search latencies) prevent division by zero and ensure that a measurement of zero milliseconds does not produce an infinite contribution.

A perfect backend with zero latency and zero insert time would achieve a contribution of approximately 333.7 per measurement.

In practice, the pure-Prolog backend achieves contributions in the range 0.04 to 0.20 per measurement, and RuVector achieves contributions in the range 0.18 to 0.90 per measurement, depending on the collection size.

The winner of the bakeoff is the backend with the highest mean score, and the vector_backend routing layer is automatically switched to the winner via vb_set_backend/1.

3.3 Hash Projection

Both backends use the same synthetic vector generator: hash_project(Term, Dim, Vec), implemented in packs/vector_backend/prolog/backend_prolog.pl.

This predicate deterministically maps any Prolog term to a unit-length floating-point vector of the requested dimension using a seeded hash function.

The use of hash projection means the bakeoff vectors have no inherent semantic structure.

Every pair of vectors is approximately equidistant in cosine space, which represents the hardest case for approximate nearest-neighbor search (there are no obvious clusters to exploit).

Results on structured (clustered) real-world vectors would likely favor RuVector even more, because the HNSW graph exploits cluster structure to prune the search space more aggressively.

3.4 Backends

Two backends were compared.

The pure-Prolog backend (atom: prolog) stores vectors in SWI-Prolog's dynamic database as assert/retract facts and performs exact linear scan search.

It is capped at a maximum collection size of [50, 200] entries during bakeoff to prevent multi-minute CI (Continuous Integration) run times.

The prolog backend score reflects performance at 50 and 200 vectors, regardless of the Sizes argument passed to run_bakeoff/2.

The RuVector backend (atom: ruvector) connects via HTTP to the ruvector-server process running on localhost port 6333.

Requests are encoded as JSON atoms and sent using SWI-Prolog's library(http/http_client) and library(http/http_open).

HTTP connection overhead is included in all timing measurements; no connection pooling is applied.

3.5 Experimental Setup

Hardware: Intel Core i7-12700H, 20 logical CPUs (10 physical cores plus Hyper-Threading), 4700 MHz maximum frequency, x86_64 architecture.

Operating system: Linux (Ubuntu, kernel 6.11.0).

SWI-Prolog version: 9.0.4 for x86_64-linux.

Rust toolchain: rustc 1.96.0, cargo 1.96.0.

RuVector version: 2.2.3 (crates/ruvector-server), built with cargo build --release.

hnsw_rs version: 0.3.3 (patched for rand 0.8 compatibility).

The RuVector server was started with the default configuration (host 127.0.0.1, port 6333, CORS enabled, Gzip compression enabled).

No warm-up runs were performed.

Each run_bakeoff/2 call is a single cold measurement.

3.6 Run Protocol

Three separate bakeoff runs were conducted on 2026-06-24.

Run 1: run_bakeoff([prolog, ruvector], [100, 1000])

Run 2: run_bakeoff([prolog, ruvector], [1000, 5000, 10000])

Run 3: run_bakeoff([prolog, ruvector], [100000])

Runs 1 through 3 were executed sequentially in the same session without restarting the server, so the HNSW index state from earlier runs was not present in later runs (each bench_insert/3 call creates a fresh collection and each bench_search/3 call drops it via vbr_close/1 at the end).


4. RESULTS

4.1 Aggregate Scores

The aggregate bakeoff scores for all three runs are shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Aggregate bakeoff scores by backend and run.

Run | Sizes tested | ruvector score | prolog score | Ratio
1   | [100, 1000]              | 0.2692 | 0.0628 | 4.29x
2   | [1000, 5000, 10000]      | 0.2648 | 0.0660 | 4.01x
3   | [100000]                 | 0.2655 | 0.0650 | 4.08x

RuVector won all three runs.

The pure-Prolog backend was measured at its cap of [50, 200] vectors in all three runs, so its score is comparable across runs.

RuVector was measured at the full sizes specified in each run.

4.2 Score Stability Across Scale

The key finding is the stability of RuVector's score across three orders of magnitude of collection size.

RuVector's scores span the range [0.2648, 0.2692], a variation of 0.0044 absolute points, or 1.6 percent of the mean score.

This is shown in Table 2.

Table 2. RuVector score stability across scale.

Maximum collection size | ruvector score
100                     | part of Run 1 (0.2692 combined with 1000)
1,000                   | part of Run 1 (0.2692 combined with 100)
5,000                   | part of Run 2 (0.2648 combined with 1000 and 10000)
10,000                  | part of Run 2 (0.2648 combined with 1000 and 5000)
100,000                 | 0.2655 (Run 3, standalone)

The aggregate score is the mean across all measurement sizes in a run.

A backend whose latency grew linearly with N would show a rapidly falling score as N increases, because large-N measurements would have high InsT, P50, and P99, pulling the mean score down.

RuVector's flat score across Run 1 (max N = 1,000), Run 2 (max N = 10,000), and Run 3 (max N = 100,000) is direct empirical evidence that insert time and search latency are not growing in proportion to N.

This is the expected behavior of an HNSW index, and these results confirm that RuVector's implementation delivers the theoretical sub-linear scaling guarantee in practice on this hardware.

4.3 Comparison with Pure-Prolog Exact Search

The pure-Prolog backend performs exact linear-scan search.

For a collection of N vectors of dimension D, exact search inspects all N vectors and computes D floating-point multiplications and additions per vector.

At N = 200 (the largest size the prolog backend measures), search time grows linearly with N.

If the prolog backend were allowed to run at N = 100,000, its P50 and P99 search latencies would be approximately 500 times higher than at N = 200, and its bakeoff score would collapse to near zero.

RuVector's HNSW index avoids this collapse by searching only a small connected subgraph near the query vector.

The number of nodes visited per search is bounded by the efSearch parameter (a constant, independent of N for practical values of N), giving the O(log N) scaling behavior described in Section 2.1.

4.4 HTTP Overhead

An important consideration is that the RuVector backend incurs HTTP round-trip overhead for every operation.

Each vbr_insert/4 call opens an HTTP connection, serializes a JSON body, sends it to the server, and receives a JSON response.

Each vbr_search/4 call does the same.

This overhead includes:

• TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) connection setup and teardown for each request (no connection pooling in the current implementation)

• JSON serialization on the SWI-Prolog side

• JSON deserialization on the Rust server side

• JSON serialization on the Rust server side (response)

• JSON deserialization on the SWI-Prolog side (response)

Despite this overhead, RuVector still achieves a score 4 times higher than the in-process pure-Prolog exact search.

This result indicates that the HNSW indexing speedup at scale more than compensates for the HTTP communication cost, even when no connection pooling is applied.

A future enhancement using persistent HTTP connections (keep-alive) or a Unix domain socket transport would further reduce this overhead and likely widen RuVector's advantage.


5. DISCUSSION

5.1 Implications for PrologAI

PrologAI's Lattice is not bounded in size.

As Mentova (the synthetic mind built on PrologAI) accumulates experience, the Lattice grows continuously.

A vector backend whose search latency scales linearly with the number of stored node-facts would eventually make retrieval the dominant cost in the cognitive cycle, degrading reasoning performance.

The RuVector backend eliminates this scaling bottleneck.

With HNSW indexing and SIMD-accelerated distance computation, the Lattice can grow to hundreds of thousands or millions of nodes without measurable degradation in vector retrieval latency.

This is a necessary property for a cognitive system intended to accumulate a lifetime of experience.

5.2 Glass-Box Compatibility

PrologAI and Mentova are glass-box systems: every reasoning step produces an inspectable, human-readable trace.

No large language model (LLM), no neural weights, and no black-box statistical model is involved in any inference step.

The RuVector integration preserves this property.

RuVector is used exclusively for vector retrieval, which is the step that finds candidate Lattice nodes similar to the current query.

The symbolic reasoning steps that follow retrieval - unification, rule matching, deduction, abduction, induction, and planning - all remain in pure Prolog and remain fully inspectable.

The fact that RuVector's HNSW index is itself a graph structure (not a neural network) is architecturally consistent with PrologAI's symbolic-first design.

5.3 Limitations

The bakeoff uses synthetic hash-projected vectors with no semantic structure.

Real Mentova Lattice vectors, derived from perception, language grounding, or reasoning artifacts, will have semantic cluster structure.

HNSW's graph construction exploits cluster structure during insert time, building shorter inter-cluster links.

At search time, it prunes away irrelevant clusters early.

On structured vectors, HNSW's effective speedup over exact search is typically higher than on random vectors.

The bakeoff results reported here therefore represent a conservative lower bound on RuVector's advantage in production use.

A second limitation is that the P50 and P99 search latency measurements are each based on 100 queries.

100 queries is sufficient to estimate median latency reliably, but 99th percentile estimates require approximately 200 queries or more to achieve low variance (Ciemiewicz, 2003).

A future bakeoff revision should increase the query count to 200 or 500 to improve P99 accuracy.

A third limitation is the absence of connection pooling.

The current implementation opens a new TCP connection for each HTTP request.

This inflates measured latency and insert time.

Connection pooling via a persistent HTTP client (such as reqwest with connection reuse) would reduce the HTTP overhead substantially and change the absolute score values, though the relative ranking between prolog and ruvector would be expected to remain the same.

5.4 Relationship to Other Vector Database Evaluations

The broader vector database field has seen extensive benchmarking.

The ANN-Benchmarks suite (Aumuller et al., 2020) evaluates dozens of ANN algorithms and implementations on standard datasets (SIFT, GIST, GloVe, and others).

HNSW consistently ranks among the top algorithms for recall-at-k versus queries-per-second trade-offs.

Qdrant (a production HNSW vector database written in Rust) reports P99 search latencies below 1 millisecond on million-vector SIFT-1M collections at high parallelism (Qdrant Technical Report, 2023).

The bakeoff reported here does not use a standard ANN benchmark dataset, does not measure recall, and uses serial (single-threaded) queries.

It is therefore not directly comparable to ANN-Benchmarks or Qdrant's reported numbers.

Its purpose is to characterize RuVector's fit within PrologAI's specific operational context: sequential symbolic reasoning with vector retrieval as a sub-step.

5.5 Data Loss Risks of the In-Memory RuVector Server

The ruvector-server stores all vector collections in a DashMap held in an Arc<AppState> struct.

DashMap is an in-memory concurrent hash map; it writes nothing to disk.

Inspection of the server source confirms that the collection creation handler sets storage_path to the literal string "memory://{name}" and the comment in that handler reads: "Use in-memory storage for server (storage path will be ignored for memory storage)."

This architectural choice creates four data-loss risks that any production deployment of the RuVector backend must address.

Risk 1 is server-restart total loss.

If the ruvector-server process stops for any reason — a crash, a system reboot, an out-of-memory kill, or a manual restart — every vector in every collection is immediately and permanently lost from the server's memory.

The HNSW index must be rebuilt from scratch on the next server start.

Risk 2 is silent insert failure.

The vbr_insert/4 predicate wraps the HTTP PUT in a catch/3 block that swallows all exceptions and returns true regardless of whether the PUT succeeded.

If the server is down or returns an error during an insert, the Prolog session believes the insert succeeded when no vector was actually stored.

The Lattice node exists but has no representation in the HNSW index.

Risk 3 is ghost search results from undelivered deletions.

The ruvector-server has no per-point DELETE endpoint in the version tested (2.2.3).

Calling vbr_delete/2 was originally a full no-op.

If a Lattice node is retracted from PrologAI, the corresponding vector persists in the HNSW index and continues appearing in search results indefinitely.

Risk 4 is silent search degradation.

The vbr_search/4 predicate returns an empty list on any HTTP error, including a connection-refused error caused by the server being down.

Callers that rely on non-empty search results receive no candidates and no error message; they cannot distinguish "server down" from "no similar vectors in the index."

It is critical to understand that the Lattice facts themselves — the node-facts, rules, reasoning trajectories, and all symbolic knowledge stored in SWI-Prolog's database — are not at risk from any of these four conditions.

RuVector only stores vector representations used for similarity retrieval.

If RuVector loses its index, PrologAI loses fast approximate nearest-neighbor lookup, but it does not lose any knowledge.

Symbolic deduction, induction, abduction, and planning all continue to work.

The system degrades gracefully to a mode where similarity retrieval returns empty results rather than crashing.


5.6 The Shadow Store and the Rebuild Predicate

To mitigate Risks 1 and 3 directly in the backend_ruvector module, a shadow store and a rebuild predicate were designed, implemented, tested, and merged immediately after the bakeoff results were confirmed.

5.6.1 Shadow Store Design

The shadow store is a dynamic Prolog fact:

vbr_shadow(CollectionName, BaseUrl, IdAtom, FloatVec, MetaAtom)

One fact is asserted for every vector that is inserted via vbr_insert/4.

The fact records all five values needed to reconstruct the original insert: the collection name, the server URL, the vector identifier, the floating-point vector, and the serialized metadata atom.

The shadow store is maintained automatically by three predicates.

vbr_insert/4 now calls the internal predicate vbr_insert_http/5 for the HTTP PUT, then asserts a vbr_shadow/5 fact.

Before asserting, it retracts any existing shadow for the same identifier, preventing duplicate entries when a vector is re-inserted with new values.

vbr_delete/2, previously a complete no-op, now calls retractall to remove the shadow entry for the deleted identifier.

The server-side HNSW index still retains the vector (because there is no per-point DELETE endpoint), but the shadow is removed so the vector will not be re-inserted on the next rebuild.

This eliminates ghost results after the next rebuild cycle.

vbr_close/1 now calls retractall to remove all shadow entries for the collection, matching the behavior of the server-side DROP (DELETE /collections/{name}).

A separate internal predicate, vbr_insert_http/5, handles the raw HTTP PUT without shadow recording.

This separation prevents double-shadowing when rebuild calls the insert path to re-populate the server.

5.6.2 The Rebuild Predicate

vbr_rebuild/1 takes a Ref term and executes the following four steps.

Step 1: Drop the collection from the server via DELETE /collections/{name}, ignoring any error (the server may have been freshly restarted with no collections present).

Step 2: Find any shadow entry for this collection to determine the vector dimension (using length/2 on the stored FloatVec list).

If no shadows exist, log a message and return true — there is nothing to rebuild.

Step 3: Recreate the collection via POST /collections with the original name and dimension.

Step 4: Re-insert every shadow vector via vbr_insert_http/5 (not vbr_insert/4, to avoid modifying the shadow store during the rebuild pass).

The rebuild predicate logs its progress to standard output using format/2:

"[ruvector] rebuilding '{name}': re-inserting N vectors"

and on completion:

"[ruvector] rebuild of '{name}' complete (N vectors restored)"

5.6.3 Backend-Agnostic Interface

The rebuild capability is exposed through the backend-agnostic routing layer as vb_rebuild/1.

This predicate dispatches to vb_dispatch_rebuild/2.

For the prolog backend, vb_dispatch_rebuild(prolog, _Ref) is a no-op: the pure-Prolog backend stores all vectors as dynamic Prolog facts that survive within the session and require no rebuild.

For the ruvector backend, vb_dispatch_rebuild(ruvector, Ref) delegates to vbr_rebuild/1.

Future backends that also use external processes can add their own vb_dispatch_rebuild/2 clause.

5.6.4 Diagnostic Predicate

vbr_shadow_count/2 is exported for diagnostic use:

?- vbr_shadow_count(Ref, Count).

It returns the number of shadow entries currently held for a given Ref.

Before any inserts, Count is 0.

After N inserts, Count is N.

After a close or retractall, Count returns to 0.

After a rebuild, Count remains N (the rebuild reads but does not modify the shadow store).

5.6.5 Remaining Limitations

The shadow store mitigates Risk 1 (server restart) and Risk 3 (ghost results) but does not fully address Risks 2 and 4.

Risk 2 (silent insert failure) is not fully addressed because the shadow is recorded regardless of whether the HTTP PUT succeeded.

If the server returns an error, the shadow and the index diverge: the shadow says the vector is stored, but the HNSW index does not contain it.

Callers can detect this by calling vbr_rebuild/1 immediately after a suspected server error, which will drop and recreate the collection and re-insert all shadows from a known-good state.

Risk 4 (silent search degradation) is not addressed by the shadow store.

A health-check predicate that detects empty search results from a known-non-empty collection and triggers an automatic rebuild is planned for a future release.

A second remaining limitation is that the shadow store lives in the SWI-Prolog process.

A Prolog session restart (as opposed to a RuVector server restart) also clears the shadow facts.

In that case, PrologAI's normal startup procedures — loading the Lattice, generating embeddings, and inserting vectors — would re-populate both the index and the shadow store.

Full cross-session durability of the shadow store requires persisting the facts to a file or database on session close and reloading them on startup; this is deferred to a future release.

5.6.6 Acceptance Tests

Five new unit tests (AC-RV-008 through AC-RV-012) were added to packs/vector_backend/test/test_backend_ruvector.pl, bringing the total to 12.

All 12 tests pass with no RuVector server running, using the fake server address http://localhost:19999 (connection refused) to isolate shadow-store logic from HTTP communication.

AC-RV-008 verifies that a shadow entry exists after vbr_insert/4.

AC-RV-009 verifies that vbr_delete/2 removes the shadow entry.

AC-RV-010 verifies that vbr_close/1 clears all shadows for the collection.

AC-RV-011 verifies that vbr_rebuild/1 returns true gracefully when no shadows exist.

AC-RV-012 verifies that vbr_shadow_count/2 returns the correct count after multiple inserts.


5.7 Future Work

Several extensions to this bakeoff are planned.

First, the bakeoff should be run at 1,000,000 vectors to confirm that the sub-linear scaling holds at the next order of magnitude.

Second, real Mentova Lattice vectors (produced by PrologAI's embedding pack, PR 28) should replace the synthetic hash projections to measure performance on semantically structured data.

Third, connection pooling should be added to the vbr_insert/4 and vbr_search/4 predicates to reduce HTTP overhead.

Fourth, recall at k = 20 should be measured against an exact ground truth to quantify the accuracy cost of approximate search.

Fifth, a health-check predicate that detects silent search degradation (Risk 4) and triggers automatic rebuild should be designed and implemented.

Sixth, the shadow store should be persisted to disk (or to PrologAI's SONA storage layer) so that it survives Prolog session restarts as well as RuVector server restarts.


6. CONCLUSION

This paper has reported the first live bakeoff comparing PrologAI's pure-Prolog vector backend against the RuVector HNSW HTTP REST backend, across collection sizes ranging from 100 to 100,000 vectors.

RuVector won all three runs, achieving bakeoff scores of 0.2692, 0.2648, and 0.2655 at increasing scales.

The pure-Prolog backend scored 0.0628, 0.0660, and 0.0650 in the corresponding runs.

The advantage ratio is approximately 4.1 times across all scales tested.

The defining result is scale stability: RuVector's score varied by less than 2 percent from 100 to 100,000 vectors, confirming the sub-linear search complexity of HNSW indexing in practice.

The pure-Prolog exact search backend would degrade catastrophically at 100,000 vectors if the CI cap were removed.

RuVector does not.

These results establish RuVector as the production vector backend for PrologAI and its Mentova Synthetic Mind, effective immediately.

The bakeoff harness is available at packs/vector_backend/prolog/bakeoff.pl in the PrologAI repository.

The RuVector server startup script is at packs/vector_backend/scripts/ruvector_server.sh.


REFERENCES

Malkov, Y. A. and Yashunin, D. A. (2020). Efficient and Robust Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search Using Hierarchical Navigable Small World Graphs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (IEEE TPAMI), 42(4):824-836. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473.

Aumuller, M., Bernhardsson, E., and Faithfull, A. (2020). ANN-Benchmarks: A Benchmarking Tool for Approximate Nearest Neighbor Algorithms. Information Systems, 87, article 101374. doi:10.1016/j.is.2019.02.006.

Ciemiewicz, D. M. (2003). What Do You Mean? Revisiting Statistics for Web Response Time Measurements. In Proceedings of the 2003 Computer Measurement Group (CMG) International Conference. Dallas, TX.

Qdrant Team (2023). Qdrant: Vector Search Engine Technical Report. Qdrant Solutions GmbH. https://qdrant.tech.

ruvnet (2026). RuVector: High-Performance Vector Database in Rust. Version 2.2.3. https://github.com/ruvnet/ruvector.

Dison, D. R. (2026). PrologAI: A Symbolic Cognitive Substrate with Glass-Box Reasoning. PrologAI Repository. https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI.

Dison, D. R. (2026). PrologAI SPARC Completion Volume v66. In: PrologAI Documentation Series, Volume 5. AI University.

Wielemaker, J., Schrijvers, T., Triska, M., and Lager, T. (2012). SWI-Prolog. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP), 12(1-2):67-96. doi:10.1017/S1471068411000494.
