LATTICE COORDINATION AFFORDANCES — L1, L2, L3, AND THE HYBRID BRIDGE  (v1)

WHY THESE EXIST

The frozen prologai-loops spike closed a reentrant cognitive loop through the
Lattice by stigmergy: one actor writes a coordination fact into the shared
environment, another reads it and reacts, and no actor ever names another. That
is the coupling property a large architecture needs. But the spike found three
frictions on today's Lattice, recorded in the PrologAI Requirements Ledger as
entries L1, L2, and L3. Wave 1 closes all three, additively, on the base lattice
module. None of the changes alters an existing predicate's behaviour; the
intended semantic write door, anchor_node/4, is untouched.

Throughout, a "nexus" is one Lattice store, opened with lattice_open/2 at a
locus:// address.

L1 — A LIGHTWEIGHT, BACKEND-FREE WRITE DOOR

The problem. The intended write door, anchor_node/4, hard-requires the
vector-embedding backend, so storing a plain, non-semantic coordination token
dragged in the whole similarity index. There was no "just put a fact" path.

The affordance. Four predicates on the base lattice module, which imports no
backend, so a lightweight write genuinely avoids loading the vector index:

    lattice_put(+Nexus, +Relation, +Args, +Referents)
        Store a fact directly through the journal. No embedding is computed.

    lattice_get(+Nexus, ?Relation, ?Args, ?Referents)
        Peek: read a matching fact without removing it. Nondeterministic.

    lattice_take(+Nexus, ?Relation, ?Args, ?Referents)
        Read AND remove one matching fact (the Linda "take" operation).

    lattice_replace(+Nexus, +Relation, +Args, +Referents)
        Keep exactly one fact per relation: drop every prior fact of that
        relation, then store the new one. This is the bounded coordination
        token — a single beat that is updated, not accumulated.

A test confirms a fact written with lattice_put reads back while
current_module(vector_backend) is false.

L2 — REAL TRANSACTION ISOLATION

The problem. lattice_transaction/2 writes begin, commit, and rollback markers to
the journal but takes no lock. Two threads can interleave a read and a write and
corrupt a shared fact. "Transaction" there means durability and framing, not
isolation.

The affordance. A three-argument transaction that takes an options list:

    lattice_transaction(+Nexus, +Options, :Goal)

With Options = [isolation(serializable)] it wraps the journaled transaction in a
per-nexus reentrant mutex, so concurrent read-modify-write on that nexus is
serialised with NO caller-supplied lock. Without that option it falls back to the
plain journaled transaction. The original lattice_transaction/2 is unchanged and
is now named, honestly, for what it is: the non-isolating mode.

Honesty about cost. A mutex is not free. Measured on an uncontended workload, the
isolation overhead is about 1.6 microseconds per transaction, roughly eleven
percent over plain journaling. The cost is real and is stated here rather than
hidden inside the fix.

A deterministic concurrency test makes the difference visible: four writer
threads each increment a shared counter twenty-five times, with a one-millisecond
window inserted between the read and the write to force the race. Under
isolation(serializable) the final count is exactly one hundred; under the plain
transaction it loses updates (twenty-five of one hundred, in the recorded run).

L3 — A REACTIVE AWAIT, AND THE HYBRID BRIDGE

The problem. The Lattice had no blocking "await a fact matching a pattern", so a
stigmergic reader had to busy-poll. Polling costs work proportional to the number
of actors times the poll rate — the single biggest threat to a large connectome's
performance, even where stigmergy wins on coupling.

The affordance. A reader can block until a matching fact appears, and a write
wakes it:

    lattice_await(+Nexus, +Relation, +Timeout, -Args, -Referents)
        Block until a fact matching Relation exists, then unify Args and
        Referents with the first match. Timeout is seconds, or the atom
        'infinite'. The reader blocks with no Central Processing Unit (CPU) use
        on a private queue; it does not spin.

    lattice_notify(+Nexus)
        Wake every reader awaiting on the nexus. Each L1 write (lattice_put,
        lattice_take, lattice_replace) calls this automatically after it commits.

THE HYBRID BRIDGE — STIGMERGY FOR STATE, NOTIFICATION FOR REACTIVITY

L3 is the most strategically important item, because it is the bridge the spike
recommended between the two ways of closing a loop. State still lives in the
environment: a reader awaits a PATTERN (a relation and its shape), never another
actor's address, so actor-to-actor references stay at zero and the strict layer
rule is not eroded. Reactivity no longer costs a spin: the write that changes the
state also sends the wake. Coordination remains fully decoupled — the writer does
not know who is waiting, and the reader does not know who will write — yet the
awaiting reader is woken the instant its condition can be met.

Every Connectome repository is expected to be built on this pattern: put or
replace a coordination fact for state, and await plus notify for reactivity.

A correctness detail worth knowing: an awaiting reader registers its wake queue
BEFORE its first existence check, so a write that happens between registration
and the check cannot be lost — the wake is queued and the reader re-checks
immediately.

AN IMPLEMENTATION NOTE

SWI-Prolog offers thread_wait/2, advertised for waiting on database
modifications. On the platform used here (version 9.0.4) its modification signal
did not fire — it only re-checked on its own retry timer, which is still polling.
L3 therefore uses a genuine message-queue condition variable instead of
thread_wait/2. This is recorded as new gap N2 in LEDGER.md.

WHERE THESE LIVE

    packs/lattice/prolog/lattice.pl     L1, L2, L3 added to the base module
    packs/lattice/test/test_lattice.pl  10 new PLUnit tests (15 total, all green)

See also LEDGER.md at the repository root for the Ledger status of L1, L2, L3,
and the still-open L9 (the /tmp journal), and docs/Strict_Layer_Rule_v1.txt for
the layer construct that keeps actor-to-actor references honest.
