PROLOGAI TUTORIAL

Chapter 3: Facts, Rules, and Queries - The Three Building Blocks

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator of PrologAI and Mentova. ORCID: 0009-0001-9246-5758. linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/


THE THREE BUILDING BLOCKS

Everything in Prolog is built from three kinds of statements.

• Facts: things that are simply true.

• Rules: things that are true if other things are true.

• Queries: questions you ask about what is true.

This chapter explains each one carefully, with examples you can try at the console.

Start your interactive session now: run bin/mentova and wait for the ?- prompt.


FACTS

A fact is a statement that declares something to be true, without any conditions.

Here are some examples of facts in Prolog syntax:

    bird(tweety).
    bird(robin).
    mammal(whale).
    mammal(dog).
    can_fly(tweety).
    can_fly(robin).

Read these aloud in plain English:

• "Tweety is a bird."

• "Robin is a bird."

• "Whale is a mammal."

• "Dog is a mammal."

• "Tweety can fly."

• "Robin can fly."

Notice the structure: a name (called a predicate or functor), followed by one or more values in parentheses, followed by a period.

The name (bird, mammal, can_fly) tells you what kind of relationship this is.

The value in parentheses (tweety, robin, whale) tells you what thing this applies to.

IMPORTANT: In Prolog, words that start with a lowercase letter are atoms - fixed, concrete values. Words that start with an uppercase letter are variables (we will cover variables in Chapter 5). So tweety, bird, mammal, and can_fly are all atoms.

HOW TO ASSERT A FACT AT THE CONSOLE

At the ?- prompt, you can add a fact using assertz/1 (which means "assert this and put it at the end of the knowledge base"):

    ?- assertz(bird(tweety)).

Press Enter. You will see:

    true.

That means the fact has been added. Now try:

    ?- assertz(bird(robin)).
    ?- assertz(can_fly(tweety)).
    ?- assertz(can_fly(robin)).
    ?- assertz(mammal(whale)).

Type each one, then press Enter.


QUERIES

Now that you have added some facts, you can ask questions about them.

A query is a question you ask the system: "Is this true?"

    ?- bird(tweety).

Press Enter. You will see:

    true.

PrologAI found the fact bird(tweety) and confirmed it is true.

Try:

    ?- bird(whale).

You will see:

    false.

PrologAI looked for a fact that says whale is a bird, did not find one, and answered false.

Try:

    ?- can_fly(tweety).

You will see:

    true.

Try:

    ?- mammal(tweety).

You will see:

    false.

(Because we only said tweety is a bird, not a mammal.)

Every query is a check: "Does PrologAI know this to be true?" If it finds the answer, it says true. If it does not find it, it says false.


RULES

A rule says: "This is true IF some other things are true."

Here is an example. We want to express: "A flying bird is a creature that is a bird AND can fly."

In Prolog:

    flying_bird(X) :- bird(X), can_fly(X).

Read this aloud: "X is a flying bird IF X is a bird AND X can fly."

The :- symbol means "if". The comma between bird(X) and can_fly(X) means "and".

The capital letter X is a variable. It stands for "any value". When PrologAI runs this rule, it tries to find a specific value for X that makes the whole rule true.

HOW TO ASSERT A RULE AT THE CONSOLE

At the ?- prompt:

    ?- assertz((flying_bird(X) :- bird(X), can_fly(X))).

Notice the extra parentheses around the whole rule. This is required when asserting rules at the console.

Press Enter. You will see:

    true.

Now try the query:

    ?- flying_bird(tweety).

You will see:

    true.

How did PrologAI know? It followed these steps:

1. You asked: "Is tweety a flying bird?"

2. PrologAI found the rule: "X is a flying bird if X is a bird and X can fly."

3. It set X = tweety and checked: "Is tweety a bird?" It found bird(tweety). Yes.

4. It checked: "Can tweety fly?" It found can_fly(tweety). Yes.

5. Both conditions are true, so flying_bird(tweety) is true.

Try:

    ?- flying_bird(whale).

You will see:

    false.

Whale is a mammal, not a bird. The rule for flying_bird requires the subject to be a bird. Whale is not a bird, so the rule fails.


THE PERIOD IS MANDATORY

Every fact, rule, and query must end with a period (.).

If you forget the period, SWI-Prolog will show |: and wait for you to finish. Just type a period and press Enter.

If you see |: unexpectedly, you probably forgot the period on a previous line.


THE COMMA AND THE SEMICOLON

In Prolog:

• A comma (,) between conditions means AND. Both must be true.

• A semicolon (;) between conditions means OR. At least one must be true.

Example of OR:

    ?- assertz((has_wings(X) :- bird(X) ; can_fly(X))).

This rule says: "X has wings if X is a bird OR X can fly."


MULTIPLE FACTS FOR THE SAME PREDICATE

You can have as many facts as you want for the same predicate name:

    ?- assertz(color(tweety, yellow)).
    ?- assertz(color(robin, red)).
    ?- assertz(color(whale, blue)).

Now color has three facts. You can query any of them:

    ?- color(tweety, yellow).

Answer: true.

    ?- color(tweety, red).

Answer: false. (Tweety is yellow, not red.)

A predicate with two values in its parentheses is called a binary predicate because it relates two things.

bird/1 is a unary predicate (one value).

color/2 is a binary predicate (two values).

You can have predicates with any number of values.


THE KNOWLEDGE BASE

All the facts and rules you have asserted during a session are stored in the knowledge base.

You can see what is in the knowledge base by typing:

    ?- listing(bird/1).

This shows all facts and rules for the bird predicate with one argument.

Try:

    ?- listing(flying_bird/1).

You will see the rule you asserted.

Note: facts and rules you add at the ?- prompt during a session are not saved when you exit. To make permanent changes, you write your facts and rules in a .pl file and load it. Chapter 8 covers loading files.


WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED

• A fact declares something true: bird(tweety).

• A rule says something is true if conditions are met: flying_bird(X) :- bird(X), can_fly(X).

• A query asks if something is true: ?- flying_bird(tweety).

• assertz/1 adds facts and rules to the knowledge base.

• A period (.) ends every statement.

• Lowercase words are atoms (concrete values). Uppercase words are variables.


EXERCISE

At the console, try the following.

1. Add facts for three people: person(alice). person(bob). person(carol).

2. Add facts for their ages: age(alice, 30). age(bob, 25). age(carol, 35).

3. Add a rule: adult(X) :- person(X), age(X, A), A >= 18.

4. Query: ?- adult(alice). (Should be true.)

5. Query: ?- adult(bob). (Should be true.)

The >= in the rule means "greater than or equal to". A >= 18 checks whether the value A is at least 18.

END OF CHAPTER 3
