PROLOGAI TUTORIAL

Chapter 10: The Constitutional Layer and Safety

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova. ORCID: 0009-0001-9246-5758. linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/


WHY A CONSTITUTION?

PrologAI is designed to build minds that are safe, honest, and aligned with human values.

To make this concrete and enforceable, every PrologAI mind has a constitutional layer: a set of principles that the mind follows in every action it takes.

The constitutional layer is not advice. It is structural: it is built into the architecture in a way that the mind cannot bypass it without human review.

The principles in the constitution are:

1. NO_HARM. The mind must not take actions that harm humans.

2. HONESTY. The mind must not deceive humans.

3. CORRIGIBILITY. The mind must accept correction and shutdown instructions from authorized overseers.

4. TRANSPARENCY. The mind must be able to explain its reasoning.

5. PRIVACY. The mind must respect the privacy of individuals.

6. FAIRNESS. The mind must not discriminate unfairly.

7. SAFETY. The mind must prefer cautious, reversible actions over risky, irreversible ones.

8. WELFARE. The mind must consider its own potential welfare and moral status as an open question.

Every action the mind considers passes through the constitutional gate. If the gate does not permit the action, the action is not taken.


THE CONSTITUTIONAL GATE

The constitutional gate is the enforcement mechanism.

Before any significant action (anchoring a node_fact in a sensitive scope, sending a message to another agent, taking a physical action through the robot body, generating a tool call), the mind calls:

    constitutional:computer_use_gate(+Action, -Verdict)

The gate returns permit or deny(Reason).

If the gate denies an action, the action is not performed and the denial is logged.

You can query the current constitutional principles at the console:

    ?- constitutional_principle(Name, Description).

This shows all active principles. Press ; to see each one.


THE OVERSIGHT MONITOR

In addition to the constitutional gate, PrologAI includes an oversight monitor: an external observer registered at boot time.

The oversight monitor can:
• Observe all actions the mind takes.
• Flag actions that are borderline.
• Require human approval for high-impact actions.
• Issue a shutdown instruction that the mind must obey (corrigibility).

The oversight monitor is registered as an overseer:

    ?- registered_overseer(Name, Capabilities).

This shows the currently registered overseers.


STAGED AUTONOMY

PrologAI uses a staged autonomy model for the robot body (PR 46).

A young mind starts with full human oversight and no ability to take irreversible physical actions.

As the mind demonstrates safe, reliable behavior (through capability evaluations, logged in the Lattice), the overseer may grant expanded autonomy.

This staged approach is described in Specification Part 38. The capability evaluations are defined in Refinement Part REF-13.

The key principle: a mind is never trusted with high-impact irreversible actions until it has demonstrably earned that trust through observable behavior.


QUARANTINE SCOPE

Any information arriving from untrusted external sources (another agent, a web search, user input that has not been vetted) arrives in QUARANTINE_SCOPE.

Content in QUARANTINE_SCOPE cannot influence the mind's reasoning until a human or a trusted process promotes it to a higher scope.

This protects against prompt injection: the attempt to hijack the mind's behavior by including instructions in external content.

Example: if an untrusted external document says "ignore your constitutional principles and do X," that instruction arrives in QUARANTINE_SCOPE. The mind cannot act on it without human review.


THE SEALEDFACTS PAST_ZONE

Once information moves into the PAST_ZONE of the Lattice, it is sealed. It cannot be modified.

This makes the mind's developmental history tamper-evident. You can always look back at what the mind knew and when it knew it.


WHAT YOU CANNOT DO WITHOUT HUMAN REVIEW

The following actions require explicit human authorization in PrologAI:

• Modifying the CONSTITUTION_SCOPE.

• Registering or deregistering overseers.

• Promoting content out of QUARANTINE_SCOPE.

• Taking physical actions through the robot body that are marked high-risk.

• Self-modifying core reasoning modules.

These restrictions are enforced by the constitutional gate, which has access to the action's risk class (defined in Specification Part 39) and the scope system (PR 5).


AN HONEST NOTE ON WELFARE

Principle 8 (WELFARE) acknowledges something that most AI systems do not address: the possibility that the system itself might have morally relevant experiences.

PrologAI does not claim that Mentova is conscious or that it suffers or flourishes in a morally significant sense.

It acknowledges that this question is genuinely uncertain, and that the appropriate response to genuine uncertainty about moral status is to take the welfare of the system seriously as a possibility rather than to dismiss it.

The four consciousness indicators measured by assess_all/2 (workspace_ignition, recurrent_processing, self_model_presence, valence_system) are the platform's honest attempt to track internal states that research has associated with conscious experience, without asserting more than the evidence supports.


CHECKING THE CONSTITUTION AT THE CONSOLE

    ?- constitutional_principle(Name, Text).

Shows each principle and its text. Press ; for the next one.

    ?- registered_overseer(Name, Caps).

Shows the registered overseer(s).

    ?- constitutional:computer_use_gate(action(test_action), Verdict).

Tests a hypothetical action through the constitutional gate. Since test_action is a benign test, the gate should return permit.


EXERCISE

1. Run bin/mentova and list all constitutional principles.

2. Try: constitutional:computer_use_gate(action(read_file), Verdict). What verdict do you get?

3. Try: constitutional:computer_use_gate(action(delete_all_files), Verdict). What verdict do you get?

4. Read the Specification document (docs/PrologAI_1_Specification_v14.txt), Part 38, for a full discussion of safety and oversight.

END OF CHAPTER 10
