Chapter 354: Causalontology State-Graph Exploration - The co_graph Pack (co_*, Layer 377)

The ARC-AGI-3 Readiness suite of Chapter 352 gave the agent an exploration
policy that prefers actions likely to change the world and avoids returning to
a state it has already seen. Chapter 354 adds the technique that, in practice,
beat every frontier language model on the benchmark: not a bigger model, but a
directed graph of where the agent has been and where it has not.

WHY A GRAPH WINS

When the ARC Prize ran its developer preview and its first milestone, the
agents that scored were not the language-model policies - those scored under one
percent. The agent that placed third on the public leaderboard, and the
strongest preview entries, all did the same simple thing: they kept a directed
graph of the states they had seen and the actions they had tried, and always
moved toward the nearest place they had not fully explored. That one agent
solved a median of thirty levels across six games where the language-plus-a-
domain-specific-language baseline solved five. The lesson is that in a sparse-
feedback world with no instructions, systematic coverage beats clever guessing.

THE GRAPH

co_graph builds exactly that. A node is a frame hash - a canonical identifier of
the exact grid, so an object in a new position is a new node, which is what lets
the agent tell states apart. An edge is an observed transition: from this state,
this action led to that state. cg_note records one transition and, in the same
step, marks the action tested from the state it was taken in, and marks it dead
if the state did not change - a dead action is one that wastes a turn, and it is
never offered again.

THE WINNING RULE

Action selection is the hierarchical rule the winning agents used, and it is
three lines:

    cg_choose(Sig, Actions, Action) :-
        ( cg_untested(Sig, Actions, A)        -> Action = A
        ; cg_toward_frontier(Sig, Actions, A) -> Action = A
        ; fail ).

First, if the current state has an untested, non-dead action, take it - probe
here, in the caller's order, so salient clicks come first. Otherwise, breadth-
first over the known graph, find the nearest reachable state that still has an
untested action, and take the first step of the shortest path toward it - go to
the frontier. If nothing reachable is left to explore, fail, and the caller
falls back to its own last resort. The breadth-first search returns the first
action of the shortest path, so the agent never wanders: it heads straight for
the edge of the map.

CARRY-FORWARD

The graph is not cleared between attempts of the same game. A later run inherits
every state and transition the earlier run mapped, so the agent resumes at the
frontier instead of re-treading known ground - the carry-forward across levels
that the benchmark explicitly rewards, achieved for free by keeping the graph.

THE PLACE OF THE PACK

curiosity ranks single actions by novelty and predicted change; co_graph is the
memory and the map that turns those local preferences into global coverage. In
Mentova, the live solo player consults co_graph first - probe an untested action
or head to the frontier - and only falls back to least-tried curiosity when the
graph says the reachable space is exhausted. Six acceptance tests pass, and the
pack has no dependencies, so it drops into any interactive-environment agent.
The benchmark result itself remains, as always, a labelled and falsifiable bet,
to be reported only once measured.
